Title: GT-VLA: Target-Conditioned Trace Guidance for Generalizable Robotic Manipulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.31904v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 00:13:51 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
# GT-VLA: Target-Conditioned Trace Guidance for Generalizable Robotic Manipulation 

Ninghan Zhong 1∗, Jing-Chen Peng 1∗, Sriram Vishwanath 1

Abstract — Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have shown strong performance on robotic manipulation, but they often struggle to generalize to unseen tasks, config-urations, and long-horizon settings. A key challenge is that VLAs overfit to training scenes and fail to follow novel language instructions. O ff -the-shelf vision-language models (VLMs) often provide stronger generalization, but cannot directly control robot actions. To combine the common sense of VLMs with VLA control, we propose Guided Trace VLA (GT-VLA), a steerable framework that accepts guidance from an external generalist VLM through trace-conditioned action generation. GT-VLA uses a gener-alist model to identify semantic guidance for the current skill, converts this guidance into a 2D visual trace, and conditions its action policy on the resulting trace-rendered observation. This design separates semantic target acqui-sition, trace generation, and low-level action execution, allowing high-level guidance to propagate to robot actions. GT-VLA uses a Mixture-of-Experts architecture with skill-specific trace and action modules for robust execution. We evaluate GT-VLA on LIBERO and a physical robot platform, showing improved generalization over recent VLA baselines in both settings. The code and additional supplemental materials are available on our project web-site at https://ivaniz.github.io/gt-vla/ .

I. Introduction 

Vision-Language-Action models (VLAs) integrate perception, planning, and control into unified poli-cies, excelling at in-distribution manipulation [1], [2]. However, they frequently su ff er from scene overfitting, repeating memorized behaviors rather than adapting to novel instructions or unseen configurations [3], [4]. While decomposing complex tasks into atomic subtasks [5], [6] or querying generalist VLMs for runtime steer-ing [6] improves robustness, these high-level semantic signals are often ignored by the low-level controller. Eff ective generalization requires a steerable execution pipeline that propagates external semantic guidance all the way to action generation. To bridge this gap, we propose Guided Trace VLA 

(GT-VLA), a framework that injects guidance from an off -the-shelf generalist model through an intermediate, actionable visual representation. GT-VLA first queries a generalist VLM to decompose a task into a skill plan (Fig. 1). For each skill, GT-VLA generates 2D visual traces anchored to a semantic point predicted by the generalist VLM, which subsequently guides down-stream action execution. This modularizes high-level  

> ∗Equal contribution.
> 1School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA, USA. {nzhong34 }@gatech.edu

intent and low-level control, preserving the VLA’s com-petence while keeping it steerable and interpretable. At the core of GT-VLA is a Trace-Action Mixture-of-Experts (TA-MoE) architecture featuring skill-specific trace and action heads. The trace head uses conditional flow-matching to generate traces conditioned on the semantic target. This trace is then used to condition action generation. We further propose a set of data aug-mentations to encourage the model to respect semantic guidance and be robust to imperfect generated traces. We evaluate GT-VLA in simulation and the real world. In simulation, we use a clean LIBERO train-test split to test generalization. We also validate GT-VLA on a physical robot platform. Across both settings, GT-VLA outperforms recent VLA baselines, demonstrating the benefit of semantic-trace conditioning for steerable and generalizable manipulation. Our core contributions are:  

> •

GT-VLA : A framework that translates high-level VLM guidance into visual traces to steer low-level VLA execution on unseen tasks and configurations.  

> •

Trace-Action Mixture-of-Experts (TA-MoE) : Amodular architecture coupling skill-specific trace generation with trace-guided action execution.  

> •

Robust Trace-Conditioning Strategies : Guidance-conditioned generation, trace perturbation, and scene masking ensure the policy respects guidance while remaining robust to imperfect traces. 

II. Related Work 

A. Vision-Language-Action Models 

VLAs leverage large-scale pre-training and semantic priors to unify language understanding, visual percep-tion, planning, and control within a single robotic pol-icy [1], [2]. Recent VLAs achieve improved performance across diverse tasks [7], [8]. However, they still struggle with unseen objects, novel scene configurations, and long-horizon task compositions [3]. To improve long-horizon execution, some methods decompose tasks into short subtasks, using embod-ied chain-of-thought to switch between reasoning and acting [6] or directly predicting an atomic skill to execute [5]. Although these methods improve sub-task composition, VLAs still overfit to visual obser-vations, reproducing memorized behaviors even when instructed otherwise [4]. Another line of work uses explicit high-level reason-ers to generate plans or intermediate decisions that are arXiv:2609.31904v1 [cs.RO] 25 Sep 2026 Execution 

> Trace-guided low-level
> action generation

“Place the corn on the blue plate and put the carrot on the white plate.” 

Conditional Flow-matching Trace Generation  

> Generalist semantic target
> guidance
> conditioning EE image state
> conditioning
> Trace Planning Fig. 1: GT-VLA overview. An o ff -the-shelf generalist VLM decomposes tasks into skills and provides skill-specific guidance. This is converted into an image-space trace conditioning for the action policy, ensuring execution follows high-level intent.

executed step by step by a lower-level VLA [7], [9]–[11]. These hierarchical designs, introduced in embodied chain-of-thought policies [11], improve generalization by separating semantic reasoning from control. Some methods freeze the VLM backbone to preserve general-purpose reasoning, but this may reduce task perfor-mance [7], [10]. Our work builds on the view that hier-archy is useful but insu ffi cient: e ff ective generalization requires a framework that can propagate guidance to the action generation level. 

B. Runtime Verification and Steering 

Runtime verification and steering improve VLA ro-bustness by introducing inference-time signals that verify or guide robot actions. Learned critics can steer candidate actions [12], but may not generalize to novel scenes or tasks. Mechanistic interpretability methods can control fine-grained behavior attributes such as speed or clearance [13], while ReSteer [14] evaluates and improves steerability with targeted data collection. Recent methods also use VLMs for runtime verifi-cation and guidance. RoboMonkey [15] selects among sampled actions using a fine-tuned VLM, LoHo-Manip [16] fine-tunes a VLM for task decomposition and visual guidance, and AHA [17] trains a VLM to detect and explain manipulation failures. FORE-WARN [18] aligns a VLM with latent-space predictions to steer robot actions. These methods show the promise of VLM-based steering, but often require additional fine-tuning of the high-level VLM. Off -the-shelf VLMs can also directly generate poli-cies [19], orchestrate tools [20], or act as performance critics [6]. However, such external verification cannot correct execution if the underlying VLA fails to in-corporate the guidance. Our work follows the run-time steering approach, using an o ff -the-shelf gener-alist model for semantic guidance and designing the downstream pipeline to be steerable by this guidance. 

C. Visual Prompting and Trace Guidance 

Visual prompting can provide spatial guidance to generalist models. In computer vision, the SAM series shows that simple geometric point and box prompts can guide zero-shot segmentation [21]. Related robotics methods use visual hints or intermediate representa-tions to connect semantic intent with low-level action. VLMs can generate semantic guidance and constraints for motion primitive execution [22]; MOKA [23] uses keypoint a ff ordances from a VLM to command a low-level VLA; SpatialVLA [24] studies 3D spatial encod-ings of action tokens; Fast-ThinkAct [25] connects se-mantic guidance to control with visual latent planning. A growing line of work uses traces as visual guid-ance for manipulation. TraceVLA [26] uses historical end-e ff ector traces to improve spatial-temporal aware-ness, while RT-Trajectory [27] shows that trajectory sketches can act as steerable policy inputs. ATM [28] predicts motion flow for the entire scene. Closer to our setting, LoHo-Manip [16] uses a fine-tuned man-ager for subtask decomposition and image-space trace planning, followed by a trace-conditioned executor, while MolmoAct [29] jointly predicts depth, traces, and actions within a monolithic action-reasoning model. GT-VLA di ff ers from prior work by both explicitly decomposing long-horizon tasks into skills, and accept-ing guidance from an external, o ff -the-shelf generalist VLM without fine-tuning, decoupling semantic guid-ance from trace generation and low-level control. Current skill          

> 𝑠 𝑖
> Deterministic Skill Router
> Semantic target
> g𝑖
> Current Observation 𝒐ₜ
> Shared VLM Backbone
> Skill-routed Trace Expert
> AdaRMS Conditioning
> Image Inpainting
> Trace
> Trace-overlaid Observation
> Skill-based instruction
> l𝑖
> Shared VLM Backbone
> Execute Action
> Skill-routed Action Expert
> Action Chunk A ₜ
> Skill-based instruction
> l𝑖
> Skill Progress
> Predictor MLP
> Skill progress
> 𝑝 𝑐 ∈0,1
> Current skill
> 𝑠 𝑖
> Deterministic Skill Router
> Target-guided Trace Generation Trace-conditioned Action Generation
> EE position
> 𝑥 𝑡

Fig. 2: GT-VLA architecture. Left : a skill-routed trace expert generates a 2D trace anchored to the semantic target g(i) and end-e ff ector position xt . Right : a skill-routed action expert predicts actions from the trace-overlaid observation, and an MLP predicts skill progress. A deterministic router selects experts for the current skill. 

III. Method 

The central goal of GT-VLA is to make VLA execu-tion steerable by semantic guidance from an o ff -the-shelf generalist VLM. Instead of relying on the VLA to infer all of the task semantics, GT-VLA uses an o ff -the-shelf generalist VLM to provide sparse guidance at inference time. This guidance is converted into a dense visual trace to aid action generation, injecting high-level intent while preserving the VLA’s learned low-level control competence. Given an instruction ℓ and observation ot , the gener-alist VLM first decomposes the task into parameterized manipulation skills. At the start of each skill, the same generalist model identifies a semantic target point in the image, such as an object to grasp, a handle to manipulate, or a placement location. A skill-specific trace expert then generates a 2D end-e ff ector trace conditioned on this target, and the corresponding ac-tion expert executes low-level actions given the trace and observation. Fig. 2 illustrates the architecture, and Alg. 1 gives the inference pseudocode. 

A. Skill Interface and Semantic Target Acquisition 

We use a finite library of manipulation skills S,where each skill s ∈ S is represented as a semi-structured operator with arguments. For example, the 

PLACE skill may be instantiated as PLACE(bowl, table) .Given a task instruction ℓ and observation ot containing camera views and robot state, we query an o ff -the-shelf generalist VLM Φ to produce a skill plan 

P = Φplan (ℓ, o t ) = s(1) , s (2) , . . . , s (k) , (1) where each s(i) ∈ S is an atomic skill to be executed in sequence. This decomposition reduces a long-horizon instruction into shorter manipulation segments, but does not by itself guarantee that the low-level policy will execute each segment in the intended way. To make skill execution steerable, GT-VLA additionally queries the generalist model for a semantic target point at the start of each skill. For the current skill s(i), the generalist model predicts a target in normalized image coordinates: 

g(i) = Φtarget (ℓ, o t , s (i)) ∈ [0 , 1] 2, (2) 

g(i) represents a spatial goal for the current skill. For example, it may mark the object to pick up, the handle of a drawer to open, or the desired placement location. This target serves as a semantic anchor for trace gener-ation, allowing the policy to convert sparse high-level guidance signal into a feasible end-e ff ector path. 

B. Target-Conditioned Trace Generation 

The purpose of the trace generator is to translate the sparse semantic target into an actionable visual guidance signal. Let xt ∈ [0 , 1] 2 denote the projection of the robot end-e ff ector position into image coordinates at timestep t. We define the ground-truth remaining trace as the future portion of the image-space trajectory that completes the skill: 

τ∗ 

> t

= ( xt , x t+1 , . . . , x tend ) , (3) where tend is the final timestep of the current skill. In practice, we resample each trace by linear interpolation along its arc length to obtain a fixed-length sequence ¯τ∗ 

> t

∈ RH×2 where H is the trace length. We predict this semantic trace using a trace prediction model πτ :

πτ τt | ot , x t , g (i), ℓ (i) . (4) The language input ℓ(i) combines ℓ and s(i), giving both high-level and skill-specific information. πτ is implemented as a flow-matching model, with the loss 

Ltrace = E( ¯ τ∗   

> t,o t,ℓ (i),g (i))∼ˆD,ϵ,λ

h∥ ˆv − (ϵ − ¯τ∗ 

> t

)∥22

i ,

ˆv ≡ vτθ ( ¯ τ∗ 

> t

(1 − λ) + ϵλ, λ, o t , x t , g (i), ℓ (i)) (5) where ˆ D is a skill-annotated demonstration dataset, λ ∈

[0 , 1] is the flow-matching time, ϵ is the noise vector, and vτθ is the predicted trace velocity field to be learned. We draw λ and ϵ following [7]. Ground-truth traces are obtained by projecting the end-e ff ector position into the camera image. Details on dataset construction are provided on the project website. The current end-e ff ector position xt is incorporated as an inpainting-style constraint to clamp the trace starting point. The semantic target provides a second constraint, injected through Adaptive RMSNorm condi-tioning (Fig. 2 left). These constraints enforce the trace to start from the robot’s current image-space position and remain anchored to the spatial goal. C. Robust Trace-Conditioned Action Learning 

The trace provides an interpretable 2D plan, but the action expert must map it to 6-DoF robot motion and gripper commands. We train the policy to follow trace guidance while remaining robust to imperfect traces and 2D–3D ambiguity. The action expert is implemented as a flow-matching model following [1], with the trace τt rendered onto the visual observation: 

πact At | overlay( ot , τ t ), ℓ (i) . (6) To force the action expert to respect the trace guid-ance while considering scene geometries, and to bridge the gap between training demonstrations and imperfect inference traces, we propose three data augmentation techniques. Visual illustrations are provided in Fig. 4. 

Random scene drop. To encourage the action expert to respect the trace, we randomly mask the scene observation while keeping the rendered trace visible. This forces the policy to sometimes act primarily from the trace guidance, reducing its tendency to overfit to memorized visual configurations in the training scenes. 

Random trace drop. Because the trace is defined in 2D image space, blindly following it can be harmful when depth, occlusion, or contact geometry matters. We randomly remove the trace overlay during training, providing only the clean image. This preserves the pol-icy’s ability to reason from the original scene image and robot state, reducing the learned controller’s sensitivity to inaccurate or geometrically ambiguous traces. 

Low-frequency trace perturbation. To bridge the distribution gap between ground-truth traces at train-ing time and generated traces at inference time, we perturb the rendered training trace with smooth low-frequency noise. This produces traces that remain plausible end-e ff ector paths but are slightly shifted or bent, addressing distribution shift between the training traces and generated traces at inference time. 

D. Trace-Action Mixture-of-Experts Architecture 

Following the recipe from [1], we instantiate πτ

and πact as small “expert” transformers attending to a shared VLM backbone. We instantiate the VLM back-bone using a pretrained checkpoint of Gemma 2B [7]. One potential challenge of image-trace conditioning is ambiguity: PICK and PLACE skills have similar traces but require di ff erent actions. Inspired by [5], we instan-tiate πact as a deterministically-routed model with one expert assigned to each skill category in our dataset. We refer to this as a skill-routed mixture-of-experts (MoE) following [5]. At training and inference time, only the expert corresponding to the skill being run is invoked. Each expert is a 300M parameter transformer, following the action expert design of [1]. We implement πτ as a lightweight flow-matching transformer ( ∼60M parameters), following the same skill-routed MoE design as the action generator. We also attach a lightweight MLP head (Fig. 2 right) to the final-layer hidden states of the shared VLM backbone, which predicts the progress pc ∈ [0 , 1] of the current skill. At inference, GT-VLA advances to the next skill once pc ≥ ηc (Alg. 1), where ηc is a chosen threshold. This controls transitions between steps during inference. 

E. Inference Algorithm 

Algorithm 1: GT-VLA Inference                                                                           

> Input: ℓ,oinit ,fupd ≥1, ηc∈[0 ,1]
> 1o←oinit // initialize obs.
> 2{s(1) , . . . , s (k)} ← Φplan (ℓ, o )// get skill plan (Sec. III-A)
> 3for each skill s(i)∈ { s(1) , . . . , s (k)}do
> 4ℓ(i)←concat( ℓ, s (i))// concat prompt and skill
> 5g(i)←Φtarget (ℓ, o, s (i))// semantic target (Sec. III-A)
> 6skillDone ←False
> 7while not skillDone do
> 8x←project( o)// end e ff ector image projection
> 9τ∼πτ(o, x, g (i), ℓ (i))// generate trace (Sec. III-B)
> 10 for each j= 1 , . . . , f upd do
> 11 ˜o←overlay( o, τ )// overlay visual trace
> 12 pc←comp( ˜ o, ℓ (i))// skill progress (Sec. III-D)
> 13 if pc≥ηcthen
> 14 skillDone ←True
> 15 break
> 16 A∼πact ( ˜ o, ℓ (i))// sample actions (Sec. III-C)
> 17 o←execute( A)// execute actions, update obs.

GT-VLA’s inference pipeline is presented in Algo-rithm 1. The algorithm takes as input a natural lan-guage prompt ℓ, current observation ot , a trace up-date frequency fupd ≥ 1 that controls the number of action expert executions between each trace refresh, and a skill completion threshold ηc ∈ [0 , 1]. First, GT-VLA queries a generalist VLM to decompose the task into a skill plan (Line 2). For each skill, the algorithm constructs a structured skill command and queries the VLM for a semantic target (Lines 4, 5). Execution then proceeds via a nested loop. The outer loop regenerates a visual trace every fupd action chunks (Lines 8, 9). The inner loop first obtains the trace overlaid visual observation (Line 11) and predicts the current skill progress pc ∈ [0 , 1] (Line 12). If the predicted progress reaches the completion threshold ηc (Lines 13-15), the algorithm proceeds to the next skill. Otherwise, the algorithm samples and executes actions, and updates current observation (Lines 16, 17). In our current formulation, the high-level skill plan is executed open-loop. Algorithm 1 can be modified to execute the skill plan in a closed-loop manner, where the high-level generalist VLM is periodically queried to replan the skill sequence to improve failure recovery. We leave evaluation of this extension to future work. “Place the eggplant on the orange plate and put the red bell pepper on the white plate.” “Pick up the tomato sauce and place it in the basket.”   

> PICKUP_FROM(tomato sauce, table) PLACE_IN(tomato sauce, basket) PICKUP_FROM(eggplant, table)
> PLACE_ON(eggplant, orange plate)
> PICKUP_FROM(red bell pepper, table)
> PLACE_ON(red bell pepper, white plate)
> GT-VLA
> (ours)
> G-VLA
> (ablation)
> AtomicVLA
> GT-VLA Trace
> GT-VLA Action
> AtomicVLA
> (ours)

Fig. 3: Comparing steerability of GT-VLA against baselines and ablations. On the left we show a task from Libero-Object, which is an OOD task. GT-VLA (top-left) is steerable by the external semantic target. G-VLA executes memorized actions despite having correct semantic guidance (mid-left). AtomicVLA (bottom-left) also fails to generalize to this instruction. In real-world experiments, we show a 4-step OOD task. GT-VLA completes all skills, while AtomicVLA fails to adapt. Original  Perturbed Trace  Scene Drop  Trace Drop 

Fig. 4: Trace-conditioning augmentations (Sec. III-C), shown on LIBERO (top row) and the real robot (bottom row). 

IV. Experiments 

Our evaluation involves four major components: (1) comparisons against recent baselines (Sec. IV-A–IV-D), (2) ablation studies on proposed designs (Sec. IV-E), (3) pilot studies on GT-VLA’s robustness to guidance noise and generalist VLM modularity (Sec. IV-F, IV-G), and finally (4) failure analysis of GT-VLA (Sec. IV-H). 

Comparisons against Recent Baselines: We evaluate GT-VLA in both simulation and on a physical robot platform. In this part, our experiments are designed to answer two questions. First, does GT-VLA improve generalization to unseen tasks, object configurations, and task compositions compared with recent VLA baselines? Second, does converting semantic guidance from an o ff -the-shelf VLM into an explicit and trace-conditioned execution signal improve steerability be-yond directly relying on the generalist model for steer-ing or verification without explicit design integrations? We compare GT-VLA against three baselines with publicly released implementations. The base π0.5

model [7], on which our method and the other base-lines are built, directly maps vision-language inputs to actions. AtomicVLA [5] predicts which skill is being executed at every step, and uses a MoE to learn each skill. SEAL [6] is a VLA steering framework using an external VLM verifier. We use Gemini 3.1 Pro to implement both SEAL and GT-VLA. We additionally provide a best-e ff ort reproduction of LoHo-Manip [16] on our project website; since no offi cial implementation is available, we report it as a supplementary comparison. 

Ablation Studies: We conduct ablation studies to evaluate two core design choices in GT-VLA: the use of a trace-generation stage, the TA-MoE architecture, and the three data augmentation techniques for trace-conditioned learning. Fig. 3 illustrates GT-VLA’s steer-ability, showing how GT-VLA adapts to unseen config-urations compared to baseline and ablation methods. 

A. Simulation Setup 

We evaluate GT-VLA on LIBERO [30]. To evaluate generalizability to unseen tasks, we forgo per-suite in-distribution finetuning. Instead, we use a clean train-test split where methods are trained on Libero-10 and Libero-90 demonstrations [6] and evaluated on the Libero-Goal, Libero-Spatial, and Libero-Object suites [30]. We preprocess the dataset to obtain task decompositions, semantic targets, and ground truth traces. The annotation procedure is similar to ap-proaches from recent work [5], [6], with details on our project website. We train all the methods for 100k iterations with batch size 64 on 4 GH200 GPUs. 

B. Simulation Results 

Table I reports the simulation results. GT-VLA achieves the best performance across all three LIBERO evaluation suites, with an average success rate of 43.8%. This corresponds to a 28.0 percentage TABLE I: Success rate on LIBERO out-of-distribution evalu-ation suites, with 50 trials × 10 tasks per category (%). 95% Wilson confidence intervals are shown in parentheses.                     

> Models Goal Spatial Object Avg.
> π0.516.2 (13.1–19.7) 29.6 (25.6–33.8) 1.6 (0.7–3.1) 15.8 AtomicVLA 30.2 (26.2–34.4) 46.8 (42.4–51.3) 24.6 (20.9–28.6) 33.9 SEAL 31.0 (27.0–35.3) 45.0 (40.6–49.5) 6.0 (4.1–8.5) 27.3 GT-VLA (ours) 38.8 (34.5–43.2) 50.8 (46.3–55.3) 41.8 (37.4–46.3) 43.8

point improvement over vanilla π0.5, a 9.9 point improvement over AtomicVLA, and a 16.5 point improvement over SEAL. Compared to GT-VLA, AtomicVLA also uses a skill-routed MoE to handle di ff erent skills, but does not sup-port high-level generalist guidance or trace condition-ing. The stronger performance of GT-VLA, particularly on LIBERO-Object, suggests that generalist information and trace guidance help performance when faced with novel objects. Although both SEAL and GT-VLA use an external generalist VLM, GT-VLA achieves substan-tially higher performance. This suggests that external guidance is not su ffi cient for steering: The VLA must also be designed to accept guidance e ff ectively. 

C. Real-world Experiment Setup 

We further evaluate GT-VLA on a physical tabletop manipulation platform. The setup consists of a YAM robot arm equipped with side-view and wrist cam-eras. The workspace contains plates, baskets, and fake vegetables with di ff erent colors, shapes, and sizes. The tasks are long-horizon pick-and-place instructions such as “place the red bell pepper into the green plate” , typically involving two to six PICK and PLACE skills. For real-world experiments, we compare against π0.5

and AtomicVLA. We do not include SEAL because it requires a high-fidelity world model or digital twin for forward simulation, which is not available for our hardware setup. We collect 299 complete episodes for training, each containing two to six PICK and PLACE 

skills. Task definitions and dataset annotations are detailed on our project website. All methods are trained for 30k iterations with batch size 64 on 4 GH200 GPUs. Inference is performed on a single GH200 GPU. To evaluate real-world generalization, we construct five evaluation suites. The first two are composition 

suites, where each task is composed of skill configu-rations that appear in training, but arranged in un-seen orders. This tests whether the model can com-pose familiar behaviors into new long-horizon instruc-tions. We evaluate 4- and 6-skill variants, denoted as 

composition-4 and composition-6 . The other three are 

OOD suites, where the skill configurations themselves are unseen. We evaluate 2-, 4-, and 6-skill variants, de-noted OOD-2 , OOD-4 , and OOD-6 , respectively. Each suite contains 10 tasks. For each task, we run 5 trials with di ff erent initial object placements, resulting in 50 trials for each method-suite pair. We report episode-level success: A trial is successful only if the robot completes the full task. 

Fig. 5: Real-world results. 5 trials × 10 tasks per category. TABLE II: Ablation results on LIBERO (%). Results use 50 trials × 10 tasks per category, except the generalist VLM swap rows, which use 20 trials × 10 tasks. Parentheses show 95% Wilson confidence intervals.                                         

> Models LIBERO Goal LIBERO Spatial LIBERO Object Avg.
> GT-VLA-single 27.6 (23.7–31.7) 40.6 (36.3–45.0) 27.8 (23.9–32.0) 32.0 G-VLA 32.2 (28.1–36.5) 39.6 (35.3–44.0) 20.8 (17.3–24.6) 30.9 No S. Drop 38.4 (34.2–42.7) 29.0 (25.2–33.1) 24.4 (20.8–28.4) 30.6 No T. Drop 36.6 (32.5–40.9) 41.8 (37.6–46.2) 21.4 (18.0–25.2) 33.3 No Perturb. 34.8 (30.8–39.1) 40.6 (36.4–45.0) 23.8 (20.3–27.7) 33.1 GPT-5.6 33.0 (26.9–39.8) 44.5 (37.8–51.4) 35.0 (28.7–41.8) 37.5 Qwen 3.8 35.0 (28.7–41.8) 37.0 (30.6–43.9) 30.5 (24.5–37.2) 34.2 Gemini 3.6 31.0 (25.0–37.7) 46.5 (39.7–53.4) 33.5 (27.3–40.3) 37.0 GT-VLA (ours) 38.8 (34.5–43.2) 50.8 (46.3–55.3) 41.8 (37.4–46.3) 43.8

D. Real-world Experiment Results 

Fig. 5 shows our real-world experiment results. GT-VLA outperforms baselines across 5 real-world suites, showing target-conditioned trace guidance’s e ff ective-ness in real settings. GT-VLA’s advantage over Atom-icVLA widens in both the composition and OOD set-tings as task horizon increases, supporting our hypoth-esis that complex manipulation requires both continu-ous semantic alignment and subtask decomposition. 

E. Ablation Studies 

We perform five ablation studies to isolate the con-tribution of the key components in GT-VLA: the trace generation stage, the MoE architecture, and the three data augmentation techniques. All ablations are evalu-ated in simulation on LIBERO following Sec. IV-A. The G-VLA removes the trace module while keeping the semantic target guidance. We retain the same MoE action architecture and inject the target directly into the action heads using AdaRMS conditioning. This tests if converting the target into an explicit trace can provide additional benefit over using the target directly. The GT-VLA-single removes the skill-routed MoE, using only a single trace-generation head and a single action head. This tests the impact of using skill-specific experts to model each skill separately. To evaluate the contributions from the three data augmentation techniques for trace-conditioned learn-ing, we train a leave-one-out ablation for each augmen-tation. No S. Drop removes the random scene drop, No T. Drop removes the random trace drop, and No Perturb. 

removes the low-frequency trace perturbation. Table II reports the ablation results. GT-VLA achieves substantially higher success rates compared to G-VLA. This suggests that directly injecting a semantic target into the action model is not enough, and the target is much more useful if it is converted into an actionable trace that the policy can visually follow. This is also visualized in Fig. 3 (mid-left) where G-VLA fails to be steered by semantic guidance alone. Further, the gap between GT-VLA-single and GT-VLA indicates that the MoE structure is beneficial, substantially improv-ing performance. Lastly, GT-VLA-single slightly outper-forms G-VLA, suggesting that the trace guidance layer can overcome a lower parameter count. Further, the three leave-one-out ablations show that each augmentation matters, as removing any one costs 10.5% - 13.2% average performance drop. The trace guidance yields limited benefit unless all three aug-mentations are present, suggesting the augmentations are complementary rather than redundant. The abla-tions, however, do not show a clear rank among them. 

F. Pilot Studies on Noisy Semantic Guidance 

Because GT-VLA relies on a generalist VLM to pro-vide semantic target points for trace generation and downstream action execution, its performance is inher-ently tied to the accuracy of these targets. In real-world or out-of-distribution deployments, the generalist VLM may output imperfect or noisy target predictions. To evaluate GT-VLA’s robustness to such inaccuracies, we conducted an additional noise-injection benchmark. In this evaluation, we systematically perturb the semantic targets generated by the VLM. For a given original target point, we define a noise radius r (in pixels) to form a bounding disk around it. We then uniformly sample a new coordinate from within this disk to serve as the perturbed target, ensuring the noise is not biased toward the original center. We test 

r ∈ { 4, 8, 16 , 32 , 64 }. Since the input observation image size is 224 × 224 pixels, the maximum perturbation radius of r = 64 encompasses over a quarter of the image width, representing severe spatial drift. Visual illustrations of these noise levels are provided in Fig. 6. 

Fig. 6: Semantic target perturbations. Top: GT-VLA success rates across LIBERO suites when conditioned on noisy se-mantic targets. Bottom: Visual illustration of perturbations. Pink cross indicates given point, white circle indicates pertur-bation max. radius, red dot indicates perturbed final point. 

We ran 100 trials for each noise radius across the three LIBERO out-of-distribution evaluation suites (see LIBERO Simulation  LIBERO Simulation Noisy        

> (noise radius = 8px)
> Hardware Horizon 4 Hardware Horizon 6
> Execution Failures –grasps, object falls, env. timeouts, etc..
> High-level VLM Error –subtask decomp., target guidance, etc..
> Trace Error –noisy trace, trace on wrong objects, disregard guidance, etc.. Trace not Followed
> Progress Predictor
> Trace 3D Ambiguity

Fig. 7: GT-VLA failure breakdowns for simulation, hardware, and noise injections. 

Sec. IV-A). The results, reported in Fig. 6, demonstrate that GT-VLA maintains robust performance for noise radii up to r = 32 pixels. Remarkably, even with this degree of perturbation, GT-VLA still generally outper-forms the baselines presented in Table I. The sharp performance drop observed at r =64 pixels highlights a natural boundary for trace-conditioning robustness. As visualized in Fig. 6, per-turbed targets at or below r = 32 pixels typically remain physically grounded on or immediately adjacent to the intended object. GT-VLA is robust to this localized noise because the target still provides a broadly correct semantic direction. However, at r = 64 pixels, the target point frequently drifts onto entirely incorrect objects or empty background space, misguiding the trace gener-ation and significantly degrading performance. 

G. Pilot Studies on Generalist VLM Swap 

In principle, GT-VLA’s design allows it to take guid-ance from any high-quality o ff -the-shelf VLM general-ist. To test this hypothesized modularity, we evaluate the impact of swapping the guidance VLM at test time to Gemini 3.6 Flash, Qwen 3.8 Max, and GPT-5.6 Terra, while freezing learned components. As shown in Table II, GT-VLA remains competitive with or outper-forms the baselines in Table I, despite using guidance VLMs unseen during training. This also highlights the key benefit of GT-VLA over related works that leverage a finetuned VLM [16]. The benefit of using an o ff -the-shelf generalist VLM goes beyond finetuning cost: GT-VLA is not tied to a single generalist and may benefit from advances in frontier models out-of-the-box. 

H. Failure Analysis 

We assign each failed episode a single primary fail-ure source, the earliest pipeline stage that deviated (Fig. 7). The results support three design choices. First, an o ff -the-shelf generalist su ffi ces for sparse high-level guidance without fine-tuning. The high-level VLM and progress-prediction errors remain a minority error source across categories. Second, the trace-conditioned policy is reliably steerable. Failures due to not fol-lowing the guidance trace range from 0.6% to 8.3% only, in contrast to G-VLA, which executes memorized motions despite correct targets (Fig. 3). Third, errors do not strongly cascade through the hierarchy and model components: perturbing the semantic target (Sec. IV-F) and extending real-world tasks from four to six skills leave the failure profile largely unchanged, so noisier and longer tasks generally fail for the similar reasons rather than through new compounding failure modes. The remaining failures lie downstream of the gener-alist and point to concrete improvements. In LIBERO, inaccurate traces are the largest source (36.5%). On hardware, low-level execution failures such as grasp slips dominate (41.7% for 4-skill tasks); these occur de-spite correct guidance and would benefit directly from stronger low-level controllers. Finally, 2D–3D ambigu-ity consistently accounts for around 20% of failures, indicating a limitation of image-space guidance itself and motivating multi-view or 3D traces. 

V. Conclusion 

We present GT-VLA, a VLA framework convert-ing o ff -the-shelf VLM semantic guidance into action-able image-space traces for control. Ablations show that this intermediate trace interface surpasses di-rect target guidance, enhancing steerability and out-of-distribution performance. GT-VLA outperforms recent baselines on unseen tasks, novel configurations, and long-horizon task composition across simulated and real environments. In future work, we aim to incorpo-rate 3D traces for more accurate guidance. Further, we note that our MoE closely follows [5], which supports continual expansion by adding a new expert and ex-tending a new router while preserving existing experts. We expect GT-VLA’s design to support continual skill acquisition but this is left to future work. 

References 

[1] K. Black et al. , “ π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general robot control,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24164 , 2024. [2] M. J. Kim et al. , “Openvla: An open-source vision-language-action model,” in Proceedings of The 8th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, P. Agrawal, O. Kroemer, and W. Burgard, Eds., vol. 270. PMLR, 2025, pp. 2679–2713. [Online]. Available: https: //proceedings.mlr.press/v270/kim25c.html [3] S. Fei et al. , “Libero-plus: In-depth robustness analysis of vision-language-action models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.13626 [4] Z. Zhan et al. , “Stable language guidance for vision-language-action models,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2601.04052 [5] L. Zhang et al. , “Atomicvla: Unlocking the potential of atomic skill learning in robots,” 2026, accepted at CVPR 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.07648 [6] Y. Wu, A. Li, T. Hermans, F. Ramos, A. Bajcsy, and C. P´ erez-D’Arpino, “Do what you say: Steering vision-language-action models via runtime reasoning-action alignment verification,” 2026 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2510.16281 [7] K. Black et al. , “π0.5: a vision-language-action model with open-world generalization,” in 9th Annual Conference on Robot Learning , 2025. [8] B. Zitkovich et al. , “Rt-2: Vision-language-action models trans-fer web knowledge to robotic control,” in Conference on Robot Learning . PMLR, 2023, pp. 2165–2183. [9] Physical Intelligence et al. , “ π0.7: a steerable generalist robotic foundation model with emergent capabilities,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.15483 [10] Z. Zhou et al. , “ChatVLA-2: Vision-language-action model with open-world reasoning,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=1lyKflUOhp [11] M. Zawalski, W. Chen, K. Pertsch, O. Mees, C. Finn, and S. Levine, “Robotic control via embodied chain-of-thought reasoning,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2407.08693 [12] M. Nakamoto, O. Mees, A. Kumar, and S. Levine, “Steering your generalists: Improving robotic foundation models via value guidance,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning ,2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= 6FGlpzC9Po [13] B. H¨ aon, K. C. Stocking, I. Chuang, and C. Tomlin, “Mechanistic interpretability for steering vision-language-action models,” in 

Proceedings of The 9th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Lim, S. Song, and H.-W. Park, Eds., vol. 305. PMLR, 2025, pp. 2743– 2762. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v305/ haon25a.html [14] Z. Chen et al. , “Resteer: Quantifying and refining the steerability of multitask robot policies,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.17300 [15] J. Kwok et al. , “Robomonkey: Scaling test-time sampling and verification for vision-language-action models,” in Proceedings of The 9th Conference on Robot Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, J. Lim, S. Song, and H.-W. Park, Eds., vol. 305. PMLR, 2025, pp. 3200–3217. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v305/kwok25a.html [16] I. Liu et al. , “Long-horizon manipulation via trace-conditioned vla planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.21924 , 2026. [17] J. Duan et al. , “Aha: A vision-language-model for detecting and reasoning over failures in robotic manipulation,” ICLR 2025 ,2024. [18] Y. Wu, R. Tian, G. Swamy, and A. Bajcsy, “From foresight to forethought: Vlm-in-the-loop policy steering via latent alignment,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2502.01828 [19] J. Liang et al. , “Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 2023, pp. 9493–9500. [20] J. Shi et al. , “Maestro: Orchestrating robotics modules with vision-language models for zero-shot generalist robots,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ forum?id=oykeBpHHXE [21] N. Carion et al. , “Sam 3: Segment anything with concepts,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.16719 , 2025. [22] J. Zhu et al. , “Bridging vlm and kmp: Enabling fine-grained robotic manipulation via semantic keypoints representation,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.02748 [23] K. Fang, F. Liu, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Moka: Open-world robotic manipulation through mark-based visual prompting,” 

Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS) , 2024. [24] D. Qu et al. , “Spatialvla: Exploring spatial representations for visual-language-action model,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2501.15830 [25] C.-P. Huang et al. , “Fast-thinkact: Effi cient vision-language-action reasoning via verbalizable latent planning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.09708 , 2026, accepted at CVPR 2026. [26] R. Zheng et al. , “Tracevla: Visual trace prompting enhances spatial-temporal awareness for generalist robotic policies,” in International Conference on Learning Representations ,2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= b1CVu9l5GO [27] J. Gu et al. , “Rt-trajectory: Robotic task generalization via hind-sight trajectory sketches,” 2023. [28] C. Wen et al. , “Any-point trajectory modeling for policy learn-ing,” Robotics: Science and Systems , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss20/p092.pdf [29] J. Lee et al. , “Molmoact: Action reasoning models that can reason in space,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //arxiv.org/abs/2508.07917 [30] B. Liu et al. , “Libero: Benchmarking knowledge transfer for lifelong robot learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.03310 , 2023. Appendix 

A. Skill Definition 

For the LIBERO domain, we defined 7 skills, in 5 categories:  

> •

PICKUP FROM(object, location) : Pick up an ob-ject from a surface or a container.  

> •

PLACE ON / PLACE IN(object, destination) :Place an object in/onto a destination. These two language skills are routed to a single expert.  

> •

OPEN(container) : Open a container (drawer or microwave).  

> •

CLOSE(container) : Close a container (drawer or microwave).  

> •

TURN ON / TURN OFF(item) : Turn an item on or o ff 

(stove knob). These two language skills are routed to a single expert. This results in 5 experts for the LIBERO setting. For our real-world experiments, we use the first 2 skill categories ( PICKUP FROM , PLACE ON/IN ), corre-sponding to two experts. The discrete skill representation provides a compact interface between high-level reasoning and low-level execution: The skill name determines which trace ex-pert and action expert are selected, while the natural language arguments specify the task-relevant objects or regions that the VLM backbone can understand. 

B. Data Annotation Pipeline 

Each demonstration consists of a high-level instruc-tion ℓ and a trajectory of robot observations and ac-tions. We first decompose ℓ into an ordered sequence of skills P = ( s(1) , . . . , s (K)) using the same generalist-VLM procedure described in Sec. III-A. The demonstration is then partitioned into the corresponding contigu-ous skill segments. For each segment, the training instruction ℓ(i) is formed by concatenating the episode instruction with the corresponding skill s(i).For every timestep within a skill segment, the ground-truth remaining trace is obtained by projecting the future end-e ff ector trajectory up to the end of that skill into image space. We additionally query Gemini 3.1 Pro for one semantic target g(i) per skill and asso-ciate this target with all samples in the corresponding segment. This produces the skill-annotated demonstra-tions used to train the trace and action experts. 

C. Parameter Allocation Details 

Following the mixture of experts implementation from AtomicVLA [5], we implement the expert weights as separate dense layers for each head. Each head ends up with some portion of shared weights (attention mechanism + AdaRMS conditioning), and some portion of weights that increases with the number of experts. SEAL [6] does not change the π0.5 architecture, only the training and inference pipelines. AtomicVLA uses a number of experts based on skill categories, plus one additional expert as a “shared expert”.                                   

> TABLE III: Approximate parameter allocations for GT-VLA and baselines.
> Part Parameters
> Vision encoder (Gemma) [1] 400M Shared VLM (Gemma) [1] 2.6B Action heads (shared) 200M Action head (per expert) 230M Trace heads (shared) 72M Trace head (per expert) 57M Progress predictor 0.6M
> π0.5/ SEAL (total) 3.4B AtomicVLA (LIBERO; 5 experts + 1 shared) 4.6B GT-VLA (LIBERO; 5 experts) 4.7B AtomicVLA (real; 2 experts + 1 shared) 3.9B GT-VLA (real; 2 experts) 3.8B
> TABLE IV: Inference time for di ff erent components of GT-VLA.
> Component Runtime Frequency
> VLM planning ∼7 s 1/task VLM guidance ∼5 s 1/skill Trace generation ∼52 ms Every 2 action chunks Action generation ∼74 ms N/A

D. Approximate Inference Time Latency Breakdown 

Table IV provides a rough latency breakdown of the main inference components in GT-VLA. In our experiments, the generalist VLM calls for task planning and semantic guidance were queried through Open-Router using gemini-3.1-pro-preview . Therefore, the absolute latency of the VLM components can vary with the queried model, serving platform, and network conditions. In contrast, trace generation and action generation are local model forward passes and are much faster than the external VLM queries. The generalist VLM calls dominate the wall-clock la-tency, but they are invoked at relatively low frequency: planning is performed once per task, and semantic guidance is queried once per skill. The trace and action modules are invoked during closed-loop execution, and their runtimes are on the order of tens of milliseconds. If lower latency is required, one practical option is to replace the generalist VLM with a faster model or a lower-latency serving backend. This may trade semantic accuracy for inference speed. Nonetheless, the robustness study in Sec. IV-F suggests that GT-VLA can tolerate a moderate amount of noise in the predicted semantic target. 

E. LoHo-Manip Reproduction 

LoHo-Manip [16] is closely related to GT-VLA, as it also uses image-space trace guidance for long-horizon manipulation. Since no offi cial implementation was available at the time of our evaluation, we provide a best-e ff ort reproduction based on the architecture and training procedure described in the paper. We evaluate it under the same out-of-distribution protocol as Ta-ble I: the model is trained on LIBERO-10 and LIBERO-TABLE V: Supplementary comparison with LoHo-Manip un-der the same LIBERO OOD protocol as Table I. Results use 50 trials × 10 tasks per suite (%). Parentheses show 95% Wilson confidence intervals. The GT-VLA row is repeated from Table I for direct comparison.             

> Model Goal Spatial Object Avg.
> LoHo-Manip (reprod.) 30.8 (26.9–35.0) 23.2 (19.7–27.1) 12.8 (10.2–16.0) 22.3 GT-VLA (ours) 38.8 (34.5–43.2) 50.8 (46.3–55.3) 41.8 (37.4–46.3) 43.8

90, and evaluated without per-suite fine-tuning on LIBERO-Goal, LIBERO-Spatial, and LIBERO-Object. For the high-level manager, we initialize from Qwen3-VL-4B-Instruct and fine-tune for three epochs, by which point the validation loss had plateaued. The vision encoder is frozen, while the language model and multimodal projector are fully fine-tuned using next-token cross-entropy on the generated response. Given the task instruction, current image observation, and a textual memory of completed subtasks, the manager predicts both the completed/remaining subtask split and a 20-waypoint 2D trace, with coordinates normal-ized to [0 , 1000], following the output representation in LoHo-Manip [16]. Based on validation loss, we se-lected the epoch-1.5 and epoch-2 manager checkpoints for downstream evaluation and report the epoch-1.5 checkpoint, which achieves the stronger aggregate per-formance across the three suites. The π0.5-based low-level executor is trained for 100k steps with batch size 64, matching the training budget used for the baselines in Table I. We also apply the same trace augmentations used in GT-VLA during executor training since we found that to be helpful from our ablation studies (Sec. IV-E). Both the manager and executor are trained using 4 GH200 GPUs. As shown in Table V, the reproduced LoHo-Manip achieves an average success rate of 22.3%, compared with 43.8% for GT-VLA. The di ff erence is relatively smaller on LIBERO-Goal (30.8% vs. 38.8%) and sub-stantially larger on LIBERO-Spatial (23.2% vs. 50.8%) and LIBERO-Object (12.8% vs. 41.8%). While this comparison is necessarily limited by the absence of an offi cial LoHo-Manip implementation, the results provide an additional comparison against a closely related trace-conditioned hierarchical approach under our OOD evaluation protocol. 

F. Real-world Experiment Training and Evaluation Tasks 1) Training Task Setup: The training dataset is split across 4 settings, with di ff erent objects on the table, de-scribed in Table VI. For each setting, 3 high-level tasks were demonstrated, described in Table VII. For each high-level task, the table was shu ffl ed 5 times to mix up object positions, then the task was demonstrated 5 times for each shu ffl e. This gives 5 × 5 × 3 × 4 = 300 demonstrations nominally, with some human errors resulting in 299 total episodes. 

2) Evaluation Task Setup: The composition suites evaluate the model’s ability to chain familiar skills 

TABLE VI: Real-world training-data settings.      

> Setting Objects table1 orange plate, blue plate, basket, eggplant, corn, carrot, green bell pepper
> table2 white plate, green plate, orange plate, eggplant, corn, carrot, green bell pepper, asparagus
> table3 blue plate, green plate, red bell pepper, green bell pepper, corn
> table4 white plate, basket, green bell pepper, carrot, eggplant, asparagus

into novel sequences. While all individual skill con-figurations are encountered during training, they are drawn from di ff erent training tasks to form completely unseen combinations. For example, Fig. 8 illustrates a 

composition-6 task, which requires the execution of six previously learned skills in a novel sequence. The OOD suites evaluate the model on tasks con-taining novel skill configurations not present in the training data. For example, Fig. 9 illustrates an OOD-6 

task requiring a sequence of six skills, where the config-urations boxed in red are unseen skill configurations. We evaluate each task over five episodes. Each episode initializes with random object placements and may include random visual distractors. To ensure fair comparisons across all methods, the object layouts are kept visually identical for each corresponding episode. In the following, we present all composition and 

OOD task instructions. Visual demonstrations of select tasks can be found in the supplemental video. 

Composition-4 

1) place the corn on the blue plate and the carrot on the white plate 

2) put the eggplant into the basket and put the basket onto the blue plate 

3) move the green bell pepper into the basket, and put the blue plate onto the basket 

4) place the red bell pepper onto the blue plate and put the corn on the white plate 

5) move the carrot onto the green plate and place the green bell pepper onto the green plate 

6) place the carrot into the basket and place the red bell pepper onto the blue plate 

7) put the eggplant on the white plate and put the carrot on the green plate 

8) move the green bell pepper onto the green plate and place the asparagus onto the white plate 

9) put the asparagus on the white plate and place the carrot into the basket 

10) place the green bell pepper into the basket and put the red bell pepper onto the blue plate 

Composition-6 

1) put the corn on the blue plate, and put both the carrot and the asparagus onto the white plate 

2) put the eggplant and the green bell pepper into the basket, and put the basket onto the blue plate 

3) put the eggplant and the green bell pepper in the basket, and place the blue plate onto the basket TABLE VII: Real-world training tasks. Objects are initially placed on the table unless otherwise specified; “–” denotes no additional initial-state constraint. 

ID Task Instruction Setting Initial State 

0 move the basket onto the blue plate and put the green bell pepper in the basket table1 –1 move the orange plate onto the basket table1 –2 move the eggplant into the basket and place the blue plate on the basket table1 eggplant on blue plate 3 move the green plate onto the orange plate and move the asparagus and corn onto the white plate table2 –4 put the carrot onto the green plate table2 green bell pepper on green plate 5 move the eggplant and carrot onto the white plate table2 corn on white plate 6 put the blue plate on the green plate and place the corn and red bell pepper on the blue plate table3 –7 place the green bell pepper on the green plate table3 green plate on blue plate 8 put the red bell pepper onto the blue plate and move the green bell pepper and corn to the green plate table3 green bell pepper on blue plate 9 place the eggplant, asparagus, and carrot onto the white plate table4 –10 move the carrot, eggplant, and green bell pepper into the basket table4 –11 place the eggplant and green bell pepper onto the white plate table4 –

Fig. 8: Visual illustration of a task setup from the composition-6 test suite. The seen skill configurations identified in the figure can be found in Table VII. 

Fig. 9: Visual illustration of a task setup from the OOD-6 test suite. The boxed skill configurations are unseen from the training dataset. 

4) place the eggplant and the corn on the white plate, and put the red bell pepper onto the blue plate 

5) move both the carrot and the green bell pepper onto the green plate, and put the corn onto the blue plate 

6) place the carrot into the basket, and place the corn and the red bell pepper onto the blue plate 

7) put the corn and the carrot on the green plate, and place the eggplant onto the white plate 

8) move the green bell pepper onto the green plate, and place both the carrot and the asparagus onto the white plate 

9) move both the green bell pepper and the asparagus onto the white plate, and put the carrot into the basket 

10) put the corn and the red bell pepper on the blue plate, and place the green bell pepper into the basket 

OOD-2 

1) place the blue plate on the orange plate 

2) put the eggplant on the green plate 

3) place the green bell pepper on the orange plate 

4) put the asparagus onto the green plate 

5) place the corn on the orange plate 

6) place the carrot onto the orange plate 

7) place the red bell pepper onto the orange plate 

8) put the orange plate on the white plate 

9) place the green plate on the blue plate 

10) put the eggplant onto the blue plate 

OOD-4 

1) place the carrot onto the blue plate and put the corn into the basket 

2) put both the green bell pepper and the eggplant on the blue plate 

3) place the eggplant on the green plate and put the asparagus in the basket 

4) place the asparagus on the green plate and put the corn on the orange plate 

5) place the red bell pepper on the green plate and put the carrot on the orange plate 

6) place the green plate on the white plate and place the red bell pepper on the green plate 

7) place the orange plate on the green plate and put the blue plate on the orange plate 

8) put both the green bell pepper and the carrot on the orange plate 

9) place the red bell pepper into the basket, and put the corn into the basket 

10) place the eggplant on the orange plate, and put the red bell pepper on the white plate 

OOD-6 

1) put both the eggplant and the green bell pepper on the blue plate, and place the corn into the basket 

2) put both the eggplant and the red bell pepper on the green plate, and place the asparagus into the basket 

3) put the carrot on the blue plate and place both the corn and the eggplant onto the orange plate 

4) place both the eggplant and the green bell pepper on the orange plate, and place the asparagus on the blue plate 

5) place both the red bell pepper and the corn into the basket, and place the carrot onto the blue plate 

6) put the corn on the orange plate, and put the eggplant onto the green plate, and place the green bell pepper on the orange plate 

7) place the asparagus and the carrot on the blue plate, and place the eggplant on the green plate 

8) put the orange plate onto the blue plate, and place both the asparagus and the corn on the orange plate 

9) place the corn on the orange plate, and put both the eggplant and the carrot on the blue plate 

10) place the red bell pepper on the white plate, and place both the asparagus and the eggplant onto the green plate G. Prompt Templates 1) Skill Planning Prompt Template: As described in Sec. III-A, given a task instruction ℓ and the current observation ot , we query an off -the-shelf generalist VLM Φ to produce a skill plan using the following prompt template, along with the side-view image. 

> You are planning a tabletop robot manipulation task. You are given: - the natural-language task instruction for this episode - the observation of the INITIAL scene Your task: 1. Decide the ordered sequence of atomic skills that, executed in order, will accomplish the instruction from the visible initial state. 2. Use ONLY the allowed skills below and follow the syntax exactly. Task instruction: {task_instruction} {SKILL_DEFINITIONS_TEXT} Planning rules: - The first skill must be PICKUP_FROM - at the start the gripper holds nothing, so it cannot PLACE_ON or PLACE_IN. - A PLACE_ON / PLACE_IN of an object must come right after the PICKUP_FROM of that object (pick, then place, then pick the next object). - Object descriptions must be short, specific, contain no commas, and reuse the appearance / color cues from the instruction (e.g. "green bell pepper", "blue plate"). - Keep the plan as short as possible while still completing the instruction. Output format: - Return JSON only. - "plan" must be a single numbered string of the exact form: "1. PICKUP_FROM(green bell pepper, table) 2. PLACE_ON(green bell pepper, blue plate)" Example: {{"reasoning": "the carrot is on the table and must go on the blue plate; the corn goes in the basket", "plan": "1. PICKUP_FROM(carrot, table) 2. PLACE_ON(carrot, blue plate) 3. PICKUP_FROM(corn, table) 4. PLACE_IN(corn, basket)"}}

2) Target Acquisition Prompt Template: GT-VLA queries the generalist model for a semantic target at the start of each skill. Given the current skill, the generalist model provides a target in the normalized image coordinates. We use the following prompt for target acquisition.